Hello and welcome back to the course
on deep learning.
Today, we're starting off the part of the course
about self-organizing maps.
It's going to be another exciting part.
It's gonna be quite an easy part.
But it's going to have its own nuances.
So let's get started.
We already talked about artificial neural networks,
convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks
in this course.
And that sums up the deep learning methods
which are collectively called supervised deep learning.
And today we're starting off into our first unsupervised
deep learning method which is the self-organizing map.
And the self-organizing maps were invented in the 1980s
by this gentleman over here, Teuvo Kohone.
So once again this is a recent photo
from just recent years,
and obviously it's been a long time
since he invented the self-organizing maps.
And sometimes they're even called the Kohonen maps
just because he was really the first person
to ever come up with this concept.
And so what are self-organizing maps used for?
Well, there is four reducing dimensionality
and here's a great example from a paper.
And by the way this is a very interesting application
of self-organizing maps.
This paper itself is about using
self-organizing maps in astronomy.
Very interesting as well.
And here, they've got a beautiful visualization
of how self-organizing maps actually work.
They take a multi-dimensional data set
which might have lots and lots and lots columns
which are the dimensions of the data set
and of course lots and lots of rows
and they reduce the dimensionality of these data sets.
So basically, instead of having 20, 30 or a hundred
or even more columns, you end up with a map,
and that's what they call a self-organizing map
so you end up with a two-dimensional
representation of your data set.
The purpose or point of the SOM is to reduce
the amount of columns.
So reduce the amount of columns from many,
many, many columns into just the two-dimensions
that you have on a two-dimensional output.
And so this is how it works.
And we'll go into more detail on this
when we're talking about how a self-organizing map learns.
For now, we just want to get the feel
for what we are aiming for,
what is the whole point of invoking a self-organizing map,
what is the outcome.
And once we know that, it will be easier for us
to understand why and how we are getting it to learn
and getting it to perform what it is performing.
So here is a SOM.
So this is an actual self-organizing map
which was produced,
and what it is depicting is actually
the different states of prosperity and poverty
in different countries.
So here you actually have countries of the world
and this self-organizing map has put them into clusters
based on lots of different indicators.
In fact in this specific example,
39 different indicators were used.
And indicators are parameters describing things
such as quality of life, factors,
the state of health in a country,
nutrition, educational services,
and so on, and so on, and so on.
And so you can imagine a huge data set
with your 200 plus countries as your rows
and 39 different columns.
So it's impossible to visualize that on its own
but then if you use a SOM,
you can reduce the dimensionality
and present it as a map like this.
So you can see that in the top left corner,
you have countries with the best or the least
alarming state of poverty.
You have Belgium here, you have Sweden, Japan, Spain.
You have Greece here.
So you can see that it's slowly going
towards the other end of spectrum
where you have countries with the most alarming
state of poverty,
where you have countries like Ethiopia over here,
then you have countries.
I think this is Zimbabwe.
I'm not 100% sure but based on the code
looks like Zimbabwe.
Then you have Guatemala possibly, and so on.
By these codes, you can study this map more and understand.
There's Australia, by the way.
If anybody's watching from Australia.
So, interesting map.
Sources over here.
It's from Finland as well.
So what can we do with this map?
Well, first of all, it's already a great representation.
So the self-organizing map was able to
in an unsupervised manner.
So this is important to understand.
This algorithm is different to everything else
we've seen before.
It has training data but it doesn't have any labels
in the training data,
so it's not like a convolutional neural network
where it actually can learn what it's seeing
and then apply that to the test.
In fact this algorithm is unsupervised
so it's basically just given data, data, data
and then it learns to group these countries.
So it wasn't told that Belgium and Sweden
and the Netherlands have to go close together.
It just learned that from the data.
It realized that, "Oh okay, these countries
"seem very similar based on all of the indicators
"I'm looking at."
And these countries seem very similar.
These countries seem similar.
And these countries seem similar.
And you can see how it's slowly, gradually
going from the least alarming state of poverty in countries
to the most alarming state of poverty
or like from left to right in this specific case.
And all of that it learned on its own.
So that's why it's called
an unsupervised learning algorithm.
And what else can we do with this map?
Well, as we said, this is already
a pretty valuable representation
but take it further, we can actually
put it onto a world map.
So they take those same colors and put them
onto world map and see what we get.
And as you can see here,
you have a beautiful world map
which shows you exactly those things.
So least alarming state of poverty over here,
here and here.
And then you have countries of the most alarming.
And as you can see based on what we know,
based on the general knowledge
we have about first world countries
and third world countries,
and where countries are developed,
where countries are still developing.
And there's still certain problems
that are being overcome with time
but there's still not at the state
as the world communities would like them to be.
You can see right away that this self-organizing map
did make quite a good prediction
that here in these countries,
you've got quite a good state,
the state of poverty isn't that alarming
as it is in countries here and for instance here
and in Southeast Asia and Eastern Europe.
So it was even able to distinguish
Western Europe from Eastern Europe, things like that.
So it's done quite a good job
and you can take those colors and put them on a map
and it's even more approachable.
It's even more understandable for humans in this form.
So that's one application of a self-organizing map.
In fact this is just one application.
There's so many different ways
and industries and different problems
where you can apply self-organizing maps.
And so just to summarize this one.
What happened here is we had the data,
which you can get from the World Bank,
and you can just download data sets from there.
And it had lots and lots of columns.
So here we can only see just three columns
but there's actually 39 indicators in this data.
So things like health expenditure, education expenditures,
percentage of GDP, the inflation possibly
and other factors that went into this data set.
All of them went into the self-organizing map.
And you could stop here.
This is already a great result and it will help you.
Imagine you didn't know,
you didn't have this intrinsic knowledge.
It would help you group your data set.
It could be not just countries.
It could be diseases
or it could be different types of equipment
that you might be considering or you might be selling
through your organization,
different types of stock and inventory.
And it could group them for you.
And you would understand different similarities
based on all of your data.
You wouldn't have to go through hundreds
and hundreds of columns.
You would be able to just look at this map
and quickly understand all of the similarities.
But in this case, we were able to take it
even a step further and visualize it on a map
which is even better and even more representable.
So there we go, that's how self-organizing maps work.
And if you'd like to get some additional reading
before we proceed with the next tutorials,
then a good paper to check out by Teuvo Kohonen
from 1990, it's called The Self-Organizing Map.
And basically, he goes through quite a few examples
of applications of self-organizing maps
and draw some conclusions there.
So check it out and I will see you on the next tutorial.
Until then, enjoy deep learning!